# DocBook plugin for Gradle #

## Motivation ##

There is an excellent [DocBook](http://www.docbook.org/) plugin
for [Maven](https://maven.apache.org/index.html):
[docbkx-tools](https://github.com/mimil/docbkx-tools).
For [Gradle](https://gradle.org/), I found some Groovy scripts floating around,
but no general-purpose plugins.

This is my attempt at one, inspired by the ideas pioneered by the Maven plugin.
Thank you, [@mimil](https://github.com/mimil)!


## Summary ##

The plugin uses Saxon with DocBook XSLT stylesheets to process a DocBook document
(and its includes) into HTML, EPUB2 and PDF. For PDF, DocBook is first processed
into XSL-FO, which is post-processed by Apache FOP. Document name and the list of
the output formats are configurable.

For processing into each output format, plugin uses a small XSL file that includes
the official DocBook XSLT stylesheet for that format. Those files can be used to
set XSL parameters for the DocBook stylesheets or for more extensive customizations.
They are a part of the Gradle project's sources, and if absent, are generated by the
plugin. 

XSL parameters can also be configured in the `Gradle` build file, in which case they
apply to all the output formats.

Values configured as `substitutions` are available within the DocBook documents by
their names. This mechanism can be used to insert things like processing date or the
version of the document into the output.    

If a data generator class is configured, it's `main()` method will be executed with
a directory path as a parameter. References in DocBook documents that are prefixed
with `data:/` or `data:` are resolved to files in that directory.  

Plugin uses JEuclid FOP plugin to process MathML when generating PDF.


## Applying to a Gradle project ##

To apply the plugin to a Gradle project:

```groovy
plugins {
  id "org.podval.docbook-gradle-plugin" version "0.2.1"
}
```

Or:

```groovy
buildscript {
  // for the plugin
  repositories {
    jcenter()
  }

  dependencies {
    classpath 'org.podval.docbook:org.podval.docbook-gradle-plugin:+'
  }
}

// for DocBook XSLT
repositories {
  jcenter()
}

apply plugin: 'org.podval.docbook-gradle-plugin'
```

For projects with code that is used to generate data for inclusion in the DocBook files,
DocBook plugin needs to be applied *after* the Scala/Java plugin -or explicit dependency needs
to be added by hand:
```groovy
processDocBook.dependsOn classes
```

If project does not contain any code nor applies any core Gradle plugins,
to get basic tasks like "clean" and "build":

```groovy
apply plugin: 'base'
``` 

Plugin adds to the project Gradle task `processDocBook` that processes DocBook :)

To make use of the DocBook processing in a directory-name-independent way:
```groovy
  project.sync {
    from project.tasks.getByPath(':<subproject with DocBook sources>:processDocBook').outputDirectory
    into '<published directory>'
  }  
```

## Configuration ##

Plugin adds to the project an extension that can be configured using `docBook` closure: 

```groovy
docBook {
  documentName = "paper"                                    // defaults to "index"

  outputFormats = ["HTML", "PDF", "EPUB2", "EPUB3"]         // by default, all supported formats are generated
                                                            // can be overriden on the command line by defining
                                                            // `-PdocBook.outputFormats="EPUB3, HTML"`

  dataGeneratorClass = "org.sample.stuff.paper.Tables"      // by default, no data is generated 

  xslParameters = [
    "body.font.family": "DejaVu Sans",
    "body.font.master": "12"
  ]

  substitutions = [
    "version": project.version       
  ]

  epubEmbeddedFonts = [ "Liberation Sans" ]                 // embedded fonts should be OpenType or WOFF!

  isJEuclidEnabled = true                                   // MathML processing for PDF is disabled by default 
}
```

### xslParameters ###

Plugin itself sets certain XSL parameters:
- `"img.src.path"` is set to `"images/"`;
- `"html.stylesheet"` is set to "css/docBook.xsl" (it's unclear if this makes sense for EPUB);
- `"base.dir"` is set to the output directory of the XSLT transform;
- `"root.filename"` is set to the output file.

Those parameters are set by the plugin only if they are not set in the DocBook extension's
"parameters" setting, and it's best to leave them alone :)  

Since plugin sets `img.src.path` XSLT parameter, images should be referenced in the DocBook
files *without* the `images/` prefix!


### substitutions ###

Values configured via `substitutions` can be accessed in the DocBook files as `entities` with
appropriate names. For instance, if a substitution value is defined for `"version"`, it can be
accessed like this: `... current version: &version; dated...`.

To enable this functionality, you need to add a Docbook DOCTYPE declaration to your DocBook document,
even though DocBook 5.x doesn't really have a DTD :).
Between the XML declaration and the root element, add the following:
```xml
<!DOCTYPE article PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V5.0//EN" "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/5.0/dtd/docbook.dtd">
```
If using root element other than `"article"`, adjust DOCTYPE declaration accordingly.

Another way to access substitution values is using processing instructions, for instance:
`<?eval version ?>`. This way, `xslParameters` are also accessible, since restrictions on the
entity names do not apply to the processing instructions. On the other hand, unlike entities,
processing instructions can only be used inside XML elements, not in attribute values.

Both substitutions and xslParameters are also accessible in the CSS files, for instance:  
```css
@font-face {
  font-family: "@body.font.family@";
  src: url("@body-font-family-url@");
}

body {
  font-family: "@body-font-family@", sans-serif;
}
```

Undefined entities break the transformation, while undefined processing instructions are ignored.
This makes the processing instructions approach more suitable for use with XML editors like Oxygen.

## Fonts ##

Default FOP configuration created by the plugin causes FOP to auto-detect available fonts,
which are then cached by FOP to save time. After installing new fonts, FOP's font cache file
needs to be removed for them to be detected.

FOP can't use some popular fonts like Roboto and NotoSans, and logs an error
"coverage set class table not yet supported" during fonts auto-detection;
see https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FOP-2704 for more details.

Plugin adds a Gradle task `listFonts` that can be used to list all the fonts that *are* available to FOP.

Some of the fonts that work well enough and support Latin, Russian and Hebrew scripts
are DejaVu and Liberation.

Property `epubEmbeddedFonts` lists font families that should be embedded in EPUB files.

## Directory Layout ##

Overview of the directory layout used by the plugin:

```
   src/main/
     css/docBook.css
     docBook/<documentName>.xml
     fop/fop.xconf
     images/
     xsl/
       epub.xsl
       fo.xsl
       html.xsl

   build/docBook/
     epub/<documentName>.epub
     html/
       css/
       images/
       index.html
     pdf/<documentName>.pdf

   build/docBookXsl/docbook/

   build/docBookTmp/
     data/
     epub/
     fo/
```

### Sources ###

Sources (under `src/main`) contain:
- DocBook document to be processed - `docBook/<documentName>.xml`;
- additional DocBook sources included by the main document - in `docBook/`;
- images used in the DocBook files - in `images/`;
- CSS stylesheet that is used for HTML and EPUB - in `css/docBook.css`;
- additional CSS files imported by the main one - in `css/`  
- DocBook XSLT customizations (specific to the output format) - in `xsl/html.xsl` and the like;
- FOP configuration - in /fop/fop.xconf.

Plugin will create CSS stylesheet, XSL customizations and FOP configuration files if
they are not present.  

### Output ###

Final output of the plugin is deposited under `build/docBook`,
in a separate directory for each output format:
- chunked HTML - in `epub/html`
- PDF - in `pdf/<documentName>.pdf`;
- EPUB file - in `epub/<documentName>.epub`.

For HTML and EPUB, CSS stylesheets and images are included in the output.

### Build ###

Plugin unpacks official DocBook XSLT stylesheets under `build/docBookXsl/docbook/`. References
in the customization XSL files that are prefixed with `http://docbook.sourceforge.net/release/xsl-ns/current/`
are resolved to the local copies, suppressing retrieval of the stylesheets for each build.
Gradle will retrieve them once when resolving dependency added by the plugin - and cache the JAR;
unpacking after each `clean` is cheap. In fact, since plugin integrates with a caching XML resolver,
this mechanism isn't really necessary, but it is already there :)
 

For output formats that require post-processing or packing, intermediate results are deposited
under `build/docBookTmp`.

Data generated by the data generator resides under `duild/data`. References to the generated data
encountered in the DocBook documents are resolved to files in that directory. 

## XSLT 2.0 ##

XSLT 1.0 DocBook stylesheets rely on some multi-output extension of Saxon for chunking HTML.
This extension is not supported in Saxon after version 6.5.3 (new Saxon).
Switching to XSLT 2.0 stylesheets (https://github.com/docbook/xslt20-stylesheets)
will allow me to use modern versions of Saxon
(and eliminate namespace-cutting messages from the XSLT 1.0 stylesheets).

Plugin has rudimentary support for the new XSLT 2.0 DocBook stylesheets.
Property that configures output formats to produce is `outputFormats2`
(overridable with -PdocBook.outputFormats2); by default, none are.
Stylesheets are unpacked under `xsl2/` output generated under `build/docBook2`;
intermediate results - under `build/docBookTmp2`.
There is no support for EPUB in the new stylesheets.

Issues with this integration:
- main HTML chunk is not `index.html`;
- HTML chunking is not deep enough;
- HTML/CSS integration doesn't work;
- FO/PDF pipeline doesn't work;
- did not try CSS/PDF pipeline.

I am not planning to pursue this - unless thete is a stylesheet that transforms MathML or LaTeX
into SVG, and it requires XSLT 2.0 :)

## Oxygen ##

### XSLT Stylesheets ###

Oxygen XML Editor makes its own copy of the DocBook XSLT stylesheets available for configuring
transformation scenarios (as a part of its DocBook framework).

### Generated Data ###
To make references to the generated data files resolve in Oxygen, add a project-specific XML catalog in
Options | Preferences | XML | XML Catalog (check `Project Options`, not `Global Options`).
Since it is possible to use relative URIs in XML Catalogs, contents of such `docbook-data-catalog.xml` file,
if it is placed in the root directory of a DocBook project (which contains `src/main/docBook/` directory),
doesn't depend on the project. Here it is:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE catalog PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD Entity Resolution XML Catalog V1.0//EN"
  "http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/entity/release/1.0/catalog.dtd">
<catalog xmlns="urn:oasis:names:tc:entity:xmlns:xml:catalog">
  <rewriteSystem systemIdStartString="data:/" rewritePrefix="build/data/"/>
  <rewriteSystem systemIdStartString="data:" rewritePrefix="build/data/"/>
</catalog>
```

### Images ###

For transformation scenarios, define `img.src.path` parameter as `../images`.

TODO Is teher a way to make images available to Oxygen during editing? 
  

## Past ##

Following features of the Maven Gradle plugin are not supported:
- non-customized XSL
- resolve XSL files based on the type of processing 
- expressions in <?eval?>
- access to the project and its properties in <?eval?>
- entities substitution files
- multiple executions with different documents and parameters


## Future ##

Following enhancements are being considered:
- support setting per-format parameters in the Gradle build file
- support reuse of XSL customizations, parameters, images and CSS  
- make XSL stylesheet version configurable
- make sure EPUB2 output contains `mimetype` file
- codify EPUB customization along the lines of [ChunkingCustomization](http://www.sagehill.net/docbookxsl/ChunkingCustomization.html) 
and epub3/README from the XSLT stlesheets distribution
- look into running MatJax stylesheets in the plugin ()without the browser to
  convert MathML for PDF (that way, LaTeX will also be supported);
- look into XSLT solutions for MatML/LaTeX -> SVG conversion
  ([pmml2svg](http://pmml2svg.sourceforge.net/doc/user-xhtml-svg/index.xhtml)
   doesn't seem to be maintained).
